Title : Moulding of the generate to control open bite during mandibular distraction osteogenesis.
Date : 2002
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Distraction osteogenesis of the craniofacial skeleton has become a widely accepted, safe, and effective means of craniofacial reconstructive surgery. Despite excellent results in general, there are still some uncertainties related to the procedure, such as development of an anterior open bite (AOB) during mandibular distraction. The aim of this study was to examine whether 'moulding of the generate', i.e. use of intermaxillary elastics during the active distraction phase is possible to close the mandibular plane angle and open bite. Three subjects, 13- and 15-year-old males and a 7-year-old female, underwent mandibular linear and angular bilateral distraction osteogenesis with moulding of the generate. Lateral cephalograms were obtained before the introduction of elastics and following distraction, once the activation was stopped and the patients were ready for the consolidation phase. Conventional cephalometric measurements were used to assess possible changes in the mandibular plane angle and incisor position. Three different anchorage systems (dental, orthopaedic, and skeletal) were used for placement of the intermaxillary elastics. Cephalometric examination showed that the mandibular plane angle was decreased during active distraction osteogenesis with the introduction of elastics and angulation of the distraction device. Depending on the type of elastic anchorage system, smaller or greater amounts of extrusion of the incisors were noted. Moulding of the generate during active distraction can be performed to reduce the mandibular plane angle and open bite. To prevent unwanted dentoalveolar changes from occurring during elastic traction, skeletal rather than dental fixation of the elastics is recommended. Intrusive mechanics may be incorporated into the orthodontic appliances to balance extrusive force by the moulding elastics.
