Title : Hirschsprung disease and other gastrointestinal motility disorders in patients with CCHS.
Date : 2021
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) is an autonomic nervous system dysfunction due to PHOX2B gene mutation. Little is known about gastrointestinal motility disorders in CCHS patients. This study aims to describe the spectrum of gastrointestinal motility disorders in CCHS and provide PHOX2B genotype-phenotype correlation with Hirschsprung Disease (HD). We reviewed the records of 72 CCHS patients seen at Children's Hospital Los Angeles from 1999 to 2019. Data collected included demographics, PHOX2B genotype, ventilator dependence, medical and surgical history, and gastrointestinal motility studies. Of the 72 patients, 31% had HD, 50% females, and 60% had 20/27 PARM. Rectosigmoid HD formed 73% of the cases whereas long segment (up to splenic flexure involvement) forms represented 23%. Four patients had total colonic aganglionosis, including one patient with 20/25 PARM genotype. One HD patient was identified with colonic myopathy in the residual segment. One patient was found to have achalasia type 1.Conclusion: Nearly one third of our CCHS patients had HD. Although most had 20/27 PARM, 2 patients had 20/25 PARM. Thus, CCHS patients with constipation are at risk for HD regardless of genotype. Colonic myopathy may coexist in treated HD with refractory constipation. Achalasia may occur in patients with CCHS. What is Known: • Patients with CCHS have motility disorders and present with esophageal dysmotility and constipation as a manifestation of their autonomic nervous system dysfunction. • About 20% of patients with CCHS have Hirschsprung disease and previously described to be associated with NPARM and 20/27 PARM genotype. What is New: • Thirty-one percent of CCHS patients in our series have Hirschsprung disease (HD). • HD, including the more severe total colonic aganglionosis was found in a patient with 20/25 PARM genotype suggesting that CCHS patients with constipation should be screened for HD regardless of genotype.
