Title : Clinical anatomy of vertebrae in scoliosis: global analysis in four different diseases by multiplanar reconstructive computed tomography.
Date : 2013
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Few accurate analyses of clinically useful vertebral anatomy have been conducted, and most have focused on thoracic idiopathic scoliosis.To evaluate the different anatomic characteristics in scoliosis by disease type and level.Observational cohort study.Forty-eight patients with scoliosis were included in this study.Subjects underwent computed tomography (CT) of the whole spine.Forty-eight patients with scoliosis were included in this study: 15 adolescent idiopathic, 11 cerebral palsy (CP), 10 muscular dystrophy (MD), and 12 congenital (CG) scoliosis patients with similar demographics. Subjects underwent CT of the whole spine, preoperatively. Eight anatomic parameters were measured in multiplanar reconstructive CT images, and statistical analysis was performed to investigate differences.In general, values in the anatomic parameters were similar for the four diseases. Each parameter showed the unique change pattern according to the spinal level regardless of curvature shape, direction, or magnitude. In particular, chord length (CL) in MD and CG scoliosis was lower than in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) and CP, and pedicle rib unit length was lower in CG scoliosis than in the other diseases (p<.05). Comparisons of convex and concave anatomies in AIS showed that inner pedicle width (PWI) and outer pedicle width (PWO) were wider for convex side, CL, pedicle width, and transverse pedicle angle were greater for concave side (p<.05), and differences were more significant at apices. However, in CP, PWI and PWO were similar between convex and concaves sides (p>.05). Although PWI and PWO were wider for convex sides and CL and pedicle length were greater for concave sides in MD (p<.05), differences were less significant at apices. Particularly, CG scoliosis showed severely deformed anatomy, with differences of seven parameters at apical vertebrae (p<.05).Clinical anatomies of vertebrae in scoliosis were found to differ significantly at different levels and in terms of convexity and disease type.
