Title : Consensus on timing of intervention for common congenital heart diseases: part I - acyanotic heart defects.
Date : 2013
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : The purpose of this review/editorial is to discuss how and when to treat the most common acyanotic congenital heart defects (CHD); the discussion of cyanotic heart defects will be presented in a subsequent editorial. By and large, the indications and timing of intervention are decided by the severity of the lesion. Balloon pulmonary valvuloplasty is the treatment of choice for valvar pulmonary stenosis and the indication for intervention is peak-to-peak systolic pressure gradient >50 mmHg across the pulmonary valve. For aortic valve stenosis, balloon aortic valvuloplasty appears to be the first therapeutic procedure of choice; the indications for balloon dilatation of aortic valve are peak-to-peak systolic pressure gradient across the aortic valve in excess of 70 mmHg irrespective of the symptoms or a gradient ≥ 50 mmHg with either symptoms or electrocardiographic ST-T wave changes indicative of myocardial perfusion abnormality. The indications for intervention in coarctation of the aorta are significant hypertension and/or congestive heart failure along with a pressure gradient in excess of 20 mmHg across the coarctation; the type of intervention varies with age at presentation and the anatomy of coarctation: surgical intervention for neonates and young infants, balloon angioplasty for discrete native coarctation in children, and stents in adolescents and adults. Long segment coarctations or those associated with hypoplasia of the isthmus or transverse aortic arch require surgical treatment in younger children and stents in adolescents and adults. For post-surgical aortic recoarctation, balloon angioplasty in young children and stents in adolescents and adults are treatment options. Transcatheter closure methods are currently preferred for ostium secundum atrial septal defects (ASDs); the indications for occlusion are right ventricular volume overload by echocardiogram. Ostium primum, sinus venosus and coronary sinus ASDs require surgical closure. For all ASDs elective closure around age 4 to 5 y is recommended or as and when detected beyond that age. For the more common perimembraneous ventricular septal defects (VSDs) of large size, surgical closure should be performed prior to 6 to 12 mo of age. Muscular VSDs may be closed with devices. Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) may be closed with Amplatzer Duct Occluder if they are moderate to large and Gianturco coils if they are small. Surgical and video-thoracoscopic closure are the available options at some centers. In the presence of pulmonary hypertension appropriate testing to determine suitability for closure should be undertaken. The treatment of acyanotic CHD with currently available medical, transcatheter and surgical methods is feasible, safe and effective and should be performed at an appropriate age in order to prevent damage to cardiovascular structures.
