Title : Double purse-string suturing: An easy plication technique in thoracoscopic repair of diaphragmatic eventration.
Date : 2020
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : The aim of this study was to describe a new double purse-string suturing plication method that was developed to minimize difficulties experienced in thoracoscopic plication in pediatric patients.We retrospectively analyzed the data of patients that underwent diaphragmatic eventration repair with new technique developed in our clinic. In this technique, we perform diaphragm plication with continuous double layer purse-string suturing. A third suturing may be necessary in case of wide eventrations. Thoracic drainage catheter is inserted into the thorax on a routine basis.Thoracoscopic plication was performed using the double purse-string suturing technique on 16 cases that presented with diaphragmatic eventration between April 2012 and December 2018. The patients' mean age was 2.2 years (6 months-17 years). The main causes of admission were recurrent respiratory system infections (n: 14), respiratory distress with effort (n: 4), ventilator dependence (n: 1), and gastrointestinal complaints such as nutritional problems (n: 1). Diaphragmatic eventration was incidentally detected in 1 patient. No complications were observed during the postoperative period, except for 1 patient that developed pneumothorax. The mean duration of hospital stay was 4.9 days (2-7 days), except for 1 patient who had ventilator dependence and congenital myopathy. The mean descending distance of the diaphragm was 2.3 intercostal spaces at postoperative first month. The clinical outcomes were satisfactory and all patients experienced symptom improvements.Diaphragm plication with double purse-string suturing method enables symmetrical stretching of the diaphragmatic muscles. Therefore, the diaphragmatic surface and costophrenic sinium are protected and remain functional. The advantages of this new double purse-string suturing method are easy application and durability. We believe that this method can become a preferred thoracoscopic plication technique for treatment of diaphragmatic eventration.
