Title : Anatomy of a duplicated human foot from a limb with fibular dimelia.
Date : 1999
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : At birth, a patient presented with a right lower limb featuring preaxial polydactyly and fibular dimelia with a complete absence of the tibia. Radiographic studies of the patient's foot revealed a duplicated tarsus with eight metatarsals and toes. The three preaxial toes were surgically removed at 1 year of age. A hallux and four normal-appearing postaxial toes remained. The foot was amputated when the patient was 3 years old. Dissection of the amputated foot revealed that the muscles of the dorsum were normal, except that the tendon of the extensor hallucis brevis muscle inserted into both the hallux and toe 2, rather than only into the hallux. The few abnormalities observed among the muscles on the plantar surface of the foot included absence of the insertions of the tibialis posterior and the abductor hallucis muscles. In addition, the two heads of the adductor hallucis muscle inserted abnormally into the medial (tibial) side of metatarsal 1, rather than into the lateral side. These various muscular anomalies, in addition to the mirror duplication of the foot with the presence of only a single metatarsal 1, leads us to propose that this metatarsal probably represents two lateral (fibular) halves that form a laterally duplicated bone. Although the dorsalis pedis artery was present on the dorsal surface of the foot, most of its derivatives were absent. This artery did give rise to a supernumerary medial branch that ended abruptly in the connective tissue (presumably postsurgical scar) at the medial border of the foot. This branch may have represented a duplicated dorsalis pedis artery associated with the duplicated preaxial portion of the foot. The arteries on the plantar surface of the foot were normal. Even though some anomalies in the pattern of the cutaneous innervation were observed, the nerves of the foot were largely normal. The gross and radiographic anatomy of this specimen and the radiographic anatomy of the leg suggest that some teratogenic event occurred when developmental specification reached the level of the future knee. The teratogenic event, which probably occurred early in the fifth week of development, may have caused damage that led to a lateral duplication of both the leg and the foot with the absence of some of the most medial structures. Teratology 60:272-282, 1999.
