Title : Neurofibromatosis in children.
Date : 1986
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : The clinical diagnosis of neurofibromatosis in childhood will usually be based on the presence of numerous café-au-lait spots. Early diagnosis allows for continuing follow-up and appropriate counselling. Symptomatic therapy can be provided if necessary. The disorder has a tendency via its mesodermal route to affect almost every system in the body; however, few laymen have even heard of the disorder and, except for the "Elephant Man" notoriety, are totally unaware of it, whereas muscular dystrophy, cystic fibrosis, and Down syndrome although occurring less frequently are well known to the general public. The management of neurofibromatosis in children covers an extremely wide spectrum: at times the management appears to be simple, involving little more than clinical evaluation and simple investigations. However, in view of the protean manifestations of the condition, a complete history including family history is obligatory, and investigation must include radiographic studies of the abdomen, chest, spine, and skull, the latter to include special views of the orbits and optic foramina. My investigation of this disorder has been extremely frustrating because of the progressive character of the disease. Nothing seems to alter the natural course of the disease. I cannot say that my investigative efforts have revealed any breakthroughs in treatment. An aggressive surgical approach to the myriad of lesions associated with this disease, especially neuromata or segmental problems, is probably advisable. The early treatment of tibial pseudarthrosis by polyprophylene orthotic and pulsating electromagnetic fields shows encouraging results over the short course, although I am not so sure as to whether or not the patients would do as well with the custom fit orthotic with or without the electronics. Early stabilization of spinal deformity has proven to be more than moderately successful and is strongly recommended following appropriate intraspinal evaluation. The management of tumors of the brain and spinal cord, as well as those associated with limb hypertrophy and congenital tibial pseudarthrosis, is undergoing innovations at this time which may result in a better cure rate. Procedures include the use of CT to evaluate tumors [Coleman et al. have attempted to differentiate neurofibromas from neurofibrosarcoma by contrast enhancement methods], the use of CO2 lasers to remove previously inoperable CNS tumors, microvascular bone transplantation and pulsating electromagnetic field to treat pseudarthrotic bones.4+he National
