Title : Laparoscopic dissection and division of distal fistula in boys with rectourethral fistula.
Date : 2017
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Congenital rectourethral fistula (RUF) is the most common form of anorectal malformations found in boys. The aim of this study is to review our experience with dissection and division of distal fistula using laparoscopic surgery in the management of RUF, especially rectourethral bulbar fistula.One hundred and two consecutive boys with congenital RUF who underwent conventional or single-incision laparoscopic surgery between July 2008 and June 2015 were enrolled in the study. The dissection of the distal fistula was performed along submucosal layer to a level 0.5 cm proximal to the urethra. Rectal mucosa of the fistula was dissected to the distal most point and completely transected flush with the posterior urethra. The residual muscular cuff was ligated with Hem-o-Lock clip or 5-0 PDS suture. Voiding cystourethrography and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging were performed at 3 mo, 6 mo, and 1 y postoperatively.All patients successfully underwent laparoscopic surgery without conversion. The mean age at the time of operation was 4.3 ± 2.9 mo. The operative times for the rectoprostatic fistula and rectobulbar fistula were similar (118.2 versus 119.4 min, P = 0.082). There was no significant difference in average operative time between conventional laparoscopic surgery group and single-incision laparoscopic surgery group (118.8 versus 119.1 min, P = 0.281). There was no injury to the urethra or vas deferens. The urethral catheter was removed on postoperative day 10. All patients were followed up. The median follow-up period was 3.3 ± 1.8 y. No recurrent fistula or urethral diverticulum was detected on voiding cystourethrography and pelvic MRI at 1 y.Submucosal dissection and division of distal fistula using a laparoscopic approach is safe, feasible, and effective for congenital RUF, especially bulbar fistula, in boys.
