Title : [Progress of EBNA1/oriP-based plasmid applied in gene therapy].
Date : 2005
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : The nonviral gene delivery systems are usually not very effective in transferring gene into target cells, and the intensity and duration of the gene expression is very poor. The EBNA1/oriP maintain EBNA1/oriP-based plasmids as episome, contribute to nuclear transport of the plasmid and transcriptional up-regulation of target gene. The EBNA1/oriP based plasmid enhances the transfection rate as well as magnitude and longevity of gene expression. This article reviews recent preclinical gene therapy studies with the EBV plasmid vectors conducted against various diseases. For gene therapy against malignancies, the EBNA1/ oriP based plasmid encoding the HSV1-TK suicide gene was combined with a cationic polymer to transfer into HCC cell line. The expression level of TK gene was 100- to 1000-fold higher than the conventional plasmid. The sensitivity of HCC to ganciclovir (GCV) elevated several hundred-fold. The EBNA1/oriP based plasmid equipped with tumor specific promoter, such as CEA promoter, enabled targeted killing of CEA-positive tumor cell. Transfection of EBNA1/oriP based plasmid carrying IL-12 and IL-18 gene either locally, or systemically, induced therapeufic antitumor immune responses including augmentation of the cytotoxic T lymphocyte and natural killer activities and growth retardation of tumors. For gene therapy of congenital diseases and chronic diseases, the EBNA1/oriP based plasmid encoding the adenosine deaminase gene was transfered into human hematopoietic progenitor cells. The ADA activity was elevated 1.5-to 2-fold. Intracardiomuscrlar transfer of the EBNA1/oriP based plasmid encoding the beta-AR gene may be useful for the treatment of severe heart failure. Human tumor necrosis factoralpha (hTNFalpha) is one of the most important inflammatory cytokines. It has been implicated in many autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. sTNFR can efficiently neutralize the bioactivities of hTNFalpha. In primary study we cloned the chimeric protein sTNFR II-IgG Fc and expect to use it in the gene therapy of the inflammatory disease relative to TNF. In summary, The EBNA1/oriP based plasmid shows advantage in gene therapy of cancer, congenital and inflammatory diseases. Moreover, the EBNA1/oriP element may greatly contribute to the engineering of a human artificial chromosome, the ultimate device for controllable gene therapy.
