Title : Causes of secondary non-alcoholic fatty liver disease in non-obese children below 10 years.
Date : 2020
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : This study aimed to detect etiologies and histopathological features of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in Egyptian children < 10 years from hepatologist perspectives. Infants and children below 10 years of age with biopsy-proven fatty liver over a 6-year period were included. NAFLD activity score was used to detect the presence of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). The study included 66 cases whose age ranged between 5 months and 10 years. Transaminases were elevated in 60% patients. Glycogen storage disease (GSD) was the most common diagnosis (33.3%) followed by hepatitis C virus (HCV) (10.6%) and Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome (CDS) (9.1%). The cause of steatosis could not be identified in 28.8% of cases. There was a higher prevalence of secondary causes of NAFLD in patients < 10 years. Liver histopathological examination revealed preserved lobular architecture in 75.7% with minimal-to-mild fibrosis in 79%. Steatosis was macrovesicular in all specimens (severe steatosis in 39.4%). Four patients had NASH. Higher degree of steatosis was associated with more severe fibrosis (P = 0.01).Conclusion: GSD was the commonest cause of secondary NAFLD in Egyptian children < 10 years followed by HCV and CDS with higher degrees of steatosis in younger patients. The degree of fibrosis was significantly related to the degree of steatosis.What is Known:• Primary non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is rare in children aged less than 10 years.• Secondary causes of NAFLD should be considered in patients who do not have traditional risk factors.What is New:• Glycogen storage disease, hepatitis C virus, and Chanarin-Dorfman syndrome are the commonest causes of secondary NAFLD in Egyptian children (< 10 years) with higher degrees of steatosis in younger patients.• The degree of liver fibrosis is significantly related to the degree of steatosis.
