Title : Percutaneous closure of post-traumatic and congenital muscular ventricular septal defects with the Amplatzer Muscular VSD Occluder.
Date : 2008
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Muscular ventricular septal defects (VSD) are an important and difficult surgical problem. In the last few years a new alternative has emerged - possibility of VSD closure using percutaneous approach.To present our experience in percutaneous closure of congenital muscular and one posttraumatic VSD.We treated 10 patients - 7 children (age 0.8-7 years) and 2 adults (43 and 46 years) with congenital VSD, and one 18-year-old patient with posttraumatic VSD (knife stab). All the patients had a large haemodynamic shunt (Qp:Qs 1.9) and in all cases percutaneous closure attempt with an Amplatzer Muscular VSD Occluder (MVSDO) implant was undertaken. Five of 6 children with multiple muscular VSDs had in infancy previous pulmonary artery banding and one patient had complex heart disease: transposition of great arteries (dTGA), pulmonary stenosis (PS) and perimembranous VSD. All procedures were performed using the standard technique.Eleven procedures were performed in 10 patients (one child had 2 attempts). Seven procedures were successful. In all cases a considerable reduction in flow or complete closure was achived. In one case, despite multiple attempts, VSD caniulation was ineffective and the procedure was abandoned. The patient had oblique VSD - morphology confirmed was later by the operating surgeon. The reason for the other 3 failures was early embolisation to the left ventricle and aorta. This complication was noted in 2 adult patients - one with congenital and one with post-traumatic VSD. In both cases the interventricular septum was thick (10 and 11 mm) and implants were removed with a bioptome or vascular lasso. Another embolisation occurred in a child with TGA - in this case the cardiac surgeon removed the implant from the aortic arch during Rastelli operation.Our experience acquired during muscular VSD closure with MVSDO indicates that the method is useful in children with isolated defects. Adult patients and children with a complex form of congenital defects should have morphology of MVSDO carefully evaluated and width of the interventricular septum measured to avoid potential implant embolisation.
