Title : Nervous system development in normal and atresic chick embryo intestine: an immunohistochemical study.
Date : 2004
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Intestinal motility disorders are a common complication after surgery for neonatal intestinal atresia. Although intestinal atresia causes alterations in the enteric nervous system, especially in its inner structures (nervous fibers in the mucosa, submucous and deep muscular plexuses), how these alterations develop is unclear. The chick model is a useful research tool for investigating the ontogenesis of the enteric nervous system and the pathogenesis of congenital bowel diseases. More information is needed on the overlap between the developing enteric nervous system and intestinal atresia. Because vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and substance P are typical intestinal neuropeptides, and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide acts as a modulator in neurodevelopment and an inhibitor of smooth muscle cell proliferation, our aim in this study was to investigate the distribution of their immunoreactivity in the developing enteric nervous system of normal and experimental chick models. We studied gut specimens excised from normal chick embryos (aged 12-20 days) and experimental chick embryos (aged 15-20 days) that underwent surgical intervention on day 12 to induce intestinal atresia (atresic embryos) or simply to grasp the bowel loop (sham-operated embryos). In normal chick embryos we showed vasoactive intestinal polypeptide and substance P immunoreactivity from day 12 in the submucous and myenteric plexuses. The distribution of peptide immunoreactivity differed markedly in atresic and normal or sham-operated gut embryos. These differences especially affected the inner structures of the enteric nervous system of specimens proximal to atresia and were related to the severity of dilation. Because nerve structures in the gut wall mucosa and submucous and deep muscular plexuses play a role in motility control and stretch sensation in the intestinal wall, our findings in the chick embryo may help to explain how gut motility disorders develop after surgery for neonatal intestinal atresia.
