Title : Direct molecular diagnosis of myotonic dystrophy.
Date : 1993
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Myotonic dystrophy (DM) arises from an unstable trinucleotide (CTGn) repeat sequence within the DM locus at 19q13.3. Twenty-three myotonic dystrophy families containing 205 persons with no symptoms, minimal manifestations, classic DM or congenital DM were investigated to validate the application of the pM10M6 probe to direct molecular diagnosis. Affected family members had been diagnosed clinically and the unaffected family members had been assigned carrier probabilities close to either zero or 100%, using closely linked flanking markers. Southern analysis identified all 89 DM gene carriers as having expansions of the unstable element. PstI detected all small expansions of the repeat sequence as easily seen discrete bands; but large expansions were usually seen as diffuse smears, sometimes difficult to distinguish from lane background. EcoRI concentrated these diffuse smears, associated with somatic instability, into discrete bands which were easy to detect; but it did not resolve the smaller expansions present in 9 (10%) of the DM carriers. It is essential that PstI and EcoRI gels are run in parallel to detect all DM gene carriers. The extent of expansion of CTG correlated with age of onset and disease severity. Biopsies of various fetal tissues from two terminated pregnancies confirmed the diagnosis obtained by CVS and revealed no heterogeneity between tissues at this developmental stage. Further expansion occurred during the culture of CVS cells, indicating that direct prenatal diagnosis needs to be carried out on CVS tissue rather than on cultured cells. The intergenerational change of the repeat sequence from DM parent to DM offspring showed a significant parental sex difference for those parents with large expansions. Contraction of the unstable element was observed in the three males carrying the largest expansions and could explain why congenital DM is exclusively of maternal origin.
