Title : Clinical and biochemical outcome of patients with very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
Date : 2019
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Very-Long-Chain Acyl-CoA Dehydrogenase (VLCAD) deficiency is a disorder of fatty acid oxidation included in the recommended uniform newborn screening (NBS) panel in the USA. It can have variable clinical severity and there is limited information on the natural history of this condition, clinical presentation according to genotype and effectiveness of newborn screening.Retrospective data (growth parameters, morbidity, biochemical and genetic testing results) were collected from patients with VLCAD deficiency, to evaluate biochemical and clinical outcomes. Descriptive statistics was used for qualitative variables, while linear regression analysis was used to correlate continuous variables.VLCAD deficiency (screened by measuring elevated levels of C14:1-carnitine in blood spots) was more frequent in Utah than the national average (1:27,617 versus 1:63,481) in the first ten years of screening. Twenty-six patients had a confirmed diagnosis of VLCAD deficiency using DNA testing or functional studies. The c.848T>C (p.V283A) variant in the ACADVL gene was the most frequent in our population. Novel variants (c.623-21A>G (IVS7-21A>G); c.1052C>T (p.T351I); c.1183-7A>G (IVS11-7A>G); c.1281G>C (p.W427C); c.1923G>C (p.L641F); c.1924G>A (p.V642M)) were identified in this study, with their pathogenicity remaining unclear in most cases. C14:1-carnitine levels decreased with age and significantly correlated with CK levels as index of muscle involvement. There were no cases of HELLP syndrome nor liver disease during pregnancies in the mothers of VLCAD patients. None of our patients developed cardiac involvement after birth and all patients had normal growth parameters while on treatment. Clinical manifestations were related to concomitant infections and altered biochemical parameters.VLCAD deficiency can be identified by neonatal screening. Most patients compliant with therapy normalized biochemical parameters and had no major clinical manifestations. Complications were completely prevented with a relatively low number of pre-emptive ER visits or hospital admissions. It remains unclear whether neonatal screening is now identifying less severely affected patient or if complications will arise as subjects become older. Observation beyond puberty is necessary to fully understand the impact of VLCAD deficiency on morbidity in patients with VLCAD deficiency.
