Title : Heterophil function and resistance to staphylococcal challenge in broiler chickens naturally infected with avian leukosis virus subgroup J.
Date : 2001
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Avian leukosis virus subgroup J has a high tropism for myeloid lineage cells and frequently induces neoplastic transformation of myelocytes. The impact of congenital avian leukosis virus subgroup J infection on the function of circulating heterophils and susceptibility to staphylococcal infection was investigated. Six-week-old broiler chickens negative for exogenous avian leukosis viruses or congenitally infected with avian leukosis virus subgroup J were inoculated intravenously with 10(6) colony-forming units of Staphylococcus aureus, and pre- and postinoculation heterophil function was assessed. All chickens developed a leukocytosis with heterophilia after inoculation, but total leukocyte and heterophil counts were significantly higher in leukosis-negative chickens than in virus-infected chickens. Tenosynovitis was more severe in leukosis-negative chickens, and 2/10 (20%) of the virus-infected chickens had no histologic evidence of tenosynovitis. Osteomyelitis in the tibiotarsus or tarsometatarsus developed in 5/10 (50%) of the chickens in each group. S. aureus was recovered from the hock joint of 6/10 (60%) of the chickens in each group. Heterophils from all chickens exhibited similar phagocytic ability pre- and postinoculation. Heterophils from virus-infected chickens exhibited less bactericidal ability preinoculation than did heterophils from leukosis-negative chickens. However, postinoculation bactericidal ability was similar in both groups. Avian leukosis virus subgroup J provirus was present in heterophils isolated from congenitally infected chickens. Heterophils isolated from broiler chickens congenitally infected with avian leukosis virus subgroup J exhibit no significant functional deficits, and infected and uninfected chickens exhibit similar susceptibility to staphylococcal infection.
