Title : The status of dermatoglyphics as a biomarker of Tel Hashomer camptodactyly syndrome: a review of the literature.
Date : 2016
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Tel Hashomer camptodactyly syndrome is a rare disease and only a few cases have been reported. Dermatoglyphics potentially provide relevant phenotypic biomarkers that were initially noted as a vital clinical feature of this disease. Dermatoglyphics possibly can indicate growth disturbances that took place during early fetal development at the time when epidermal ridges were being formed into discernable patterns. Consequently, these intrauterine effects might well have occurred in association with the expression of the Tel Hashomer camptodactyly syndrome. Therefore, this review was undertaken to provide, as far as we know, the first attempt to broadly assess dermatoglyphic features that are connected with the Tel Hashomer camptodactyly syndrome. If a developmental association between dermatoglyphics and Tel Hashomer camptodactyly can be firmly established, this would probably document that Tel Hashomer camptodactyly disease has its origins during the early fetal period.A systematic literature search was conducted using articles from PubMed (Medline), POPLINE, Trip Database, Cochrane Library, and gray literature up to 31 March 2015. The review was performed according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses statement.Fourteen relevant publications were included in the review. There were 23 cases of patients with Tel Hashomer camptodactyly syndrome that were described in these published articles. We reviewed the dermatoglyphics of 21 available cases out of all of the published and electronically available cases of Tel Hashomer camptodactyly. Eight cases reported whorls to be the most common digital pattern with an expected rise of ridge count. Two cases show significantly high frequencies of arch patterns. Further, there were increased numbers of palmar creases, along with abnormal flexion creases or other palmar dermatoglyphic abnormalities reported in all cases.This review highlighted the desirability of thoroughly observing and recording dermatoglyphic features when reporting on future patients with Tel Hashomer camptodactyly syndrome, in conjunction with carrying out modern molecular methods.
