Title : Late deformities following the transfer of the flexor carpi ulnaris to the extensor carpi radialis brevis in children with cerebral palsy.
Date : 2010
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : The transfer of flexor carpi ulnaris (FCU) to extensor carpi radialis brevis (ECRB) (the Green transfer) in children with cerebral palsy (CP) is a surgical option frequently used to address the typical wrist flexion deformity that is often present in these patients. We hypothesize that late deformities may occur when these transfers are performed in patients before skeletal maturity. The purpose of this investigation was to determine the frequency of these deformities and the factors that influence their development.We performed 41 FCU to ECRB tendon transfers in children with CP at our institution between 1987 and 2005 and retrospectively reviewed them. A total of 24 patients with 25 transfers had a minimum 2-year follow-up and were included in the study population. We identified patients who developed a late deformity after tendon transfer. We analyzed medical records of these patients to identify factors associated with the development of a deformity.Of the 25 transfers, 12 developed a late deformity between 10 and 105 months postoperatively. The deformities that developed were extension deformities (8), supination deformities (one), and recurrent flexion deformities (3). Of the 12 patients with deformity, 9 required revision surgeries. Of these 12 patients, 9 who were less than 13 years of age at the time of transfer developed a late deformity, compared with 3 who were older than 13 years of age.The FCU to ECRB tendon transfer remains a viable option to address the wrist flexion deformity seen in patients with CP. Care should be taken when performing this tendon transfer in patients less than 13 years of age because they may develop a postoperative deformity, commonly an extension deformity. We believe that these deformities develop when the patient enters a growth spurt and the transferred muscle-tendon unit does not lengthen at the same rate as the involved upper extremity.Therapeutic IV.
