Title : Monogenic forms of lipodystrophic syndromes: diagnosis, detection, and practical management considerations from clinical cases.
Date : 2019
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Lipodystrophic syndromes are rare diseases of genetic or acquired origin characterized by partial or generalized lack of body fat. Early detection and diagnosis are crucial to prevent and manage associated metabolic dysfunctions, i.e. insulin resistance, dyslipidemia, fatty liver, and diabetes, and to provide appropriate genetic counseling. By means of several representative case studies, this article illustrates the diagnostic and management challenges of lipodystrophic syndromes.Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipodystrophy (BSCL) is typically diagnosed at birth, or soon thereafter, with generalized lipoatrophy and hepatomegaly secondary to hepatic steatosis. Physicians must also consider this diagnosis in adults with atypical non-autoimmune diabetes, hypertriglyceridemia, and a lean and muscular phenotype. The BSCL1 subtype due to mutations in the AGPAT2 gene can have an unusual presentation, especially in neonates and infants. Particular attention should be paid to infants presenting failure to thrive who also have hepatomegaly and metabolic derangements. The BSCL2 sub-type due to mutations in the BSCL gene tends to be more severe than BSCL1, and is characterized by greater fat loss, mild intellectual disability, earlier onset of diabetes, and higher incidence of premature death. Effective management from an earlier age may moderate the natural disease course. Partial lipodystrophies may easily be confused with common central obesity and/or metabolic syndrome. In patients with unexplained pancreatitis and hypertriglyceridemia, lipodystrophies such as familial partial lipodystrophy type 2 (FPLD2; Dunnigan type, due to LMNA mutations) should be considered. Oral combined contraceptives, which can reveal the disease by inducing severe hypertriglyceridemia, are contraindicated. Endogenous estrogens may also lead to "unmasking" of the FPLD2 phenotype, which often appears at puberty, and is more severe in females than males.Diet and exercise, adapted to age and potential comorbidities, are essential prerequisites for therapeutic management of lipodystrophic syndromes. Metreleptin therapy can be useful to manage lipodystrophy-related metabolic complications.
