Title : Extended vertical trapezius myocutaneous flap in head and neck reconstruction as a salvage procedure.
Date : 2004
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : In surgical treatment of head and neck cancer, when local tumor recurrence or failure of the previous reconstruction method occurs, reoperation for reconstruction of complicated soft-tissue defects can become a challenge for the plastic surgeon. This article describes the authors' experience with the extended vertical trapezius myocutaneous flap for head and neck complicated soft-tissue defects in nine patients ranging in age from 17 to 72 years. The causes of the defects were squamous cell carcinoma of the external ear (n = 2), lip (n = 2), larynx (n = 1), and oral cavity floor (n = 1); congenital hemifacial atrophy-temporomandibular joint ankylosis (n = 1); synovial sarcoma at the mandibular ramus (n = 1); and malignant fibrous histiocytoma at the posterior cranial fossa (n = 1). Eight of the nine patients had previously been operated on using other flap procedures, including free flaps and/or distant pedicled flaps (pectoralis major and deltopectoral flaps). One patient had been operated on using a graft procedure. After failure of the previous flap procedures in four patients and tumor recurrence in five patients, the extended vertical trapezius myocutaneous pedicled flap was used as a salvage procedure. The mean flap size was 7 x 34 cm. The flap was based solely on the transverse cervical artery. Superior muscle fibers of the trapezius were preserved and the caudal end of the flap was extended from 10 to 13 cm beyond the caudal end of the trapezius muscle. Three weeks postoperatively, the pedicle was separated. No flap failure occurred. The donor sites were closed primarily. There were no disabilities with regard to shoulder motion. Tumor recurrence was observed in two patients. In conclusion, for complicated soft-tissue defects of the head and neck, the extended vertical trapezius flap can be preferred as a salvage procedure because it is a simple, reliable, large flap that is located far enough from the damaged area.
