Title : Congenital myopathies and congenital muscular dystrophies.
Date : 2001
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Congenital myopathies and congenital myopathic dystrophies are distinct groups of inherited diseases of muscle, genetically heterogeneous, that manifest in early life or infancy. Congenital myopathic dystrophy is characterized by a dystrophic pattern, whereas no necrotic or degenerative changes are present in congenital myopathies. Much progress has been made in recent years in clarifying the classification of the congenital myopathies. This is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous group of conditions originally classified according to unique morphological changes seen in muscle. Not unlike the later-onset muscular dystrophies, the discovery of the genetic aetiology of many of the congenital myopathies has led to a revamping of how these conditions can now be diagnosed and this should enable physicians to give a more accurate prognosis to patients and their families. New mutations in the ryanodine receptor, slow tropomyosin, troponin T1, actin, and nebulin genes have been described in the last 2 years. Clinical and genetic guidelines for conditions like nemaline rod myopathy and central core disease have been suggested. The notion of minus and surplus protein myopathies has been developed. Several groups of congenital myopathic dystrophy have been identified. In the first category, without intellectual impairment or major structural brain abnormalities, half of the cases are merosin deficient due to mutations of the laminin alpha 2 chain gene. If generally the muscular phenotype is severe, mild allelic variants have been reported with early onset dystrophies and partial merosin deficiency. Among other pure congenital myopathic dystrophies unlinked to the laminin alpha 2 gene, one form has been assigned to chromosome 1q42. In the group of congenital myopathic dystrophies associated with mental retardation and structural brain abnormalities, two main entities are genetically characterized: (1) Fukuyama congenital myopathic dystrophy, affecting the Japanese population, is due to fukutin gene mutations, and (2) the muscle eye brain syndrome assigned to chromosome 1p32-34. In several cases, the gene localization remains unknown.
