Title : Development of a research platform for children with arthrogryposis multiplex congenita: study protocol for a pilot registry.
Date : 2018
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita (AMC) describes a heterogeneous group of conditions with multiple congenital contractures. These conditions may be attributed to genetic or other factors inducing decreased fetal movements, including maternal and paternal factors. Discovering the underlying genetic pathways has important repercussions for prevention, gene therapy and genetic counselling. The current literature mainly consists of small-scale, single-site studies, limiting comparability and pooling of findings across individual studies. A pilot registry for children presenting with AMC is proposed to provide the framework for a large-scale AMC registry. This registry will provide the platform to support high-quality studies to inform the distribution, clinical practice and genetics contributing to this group of conditions.The registry will be piloted on 40 families of children from birth to 21 years of age presenting with AMC. Data will be collected on the child (demographic and newborn variables), mother and father (demographic, lifestyle habits and medical history). To promote standardised data collection, a manual of operations will be developed. Descriptive statistics will be used to summarise relevant data, regression analyses will be used to explore associations to generate hypotheses regarding factors contributing to AMC. Qualitative analysis will also be used to better describe the various phenotypes.Ethics approval was obtained at the participating sites. The pilot registry will provide the platform for multisite AMC registry that will generate multiple research avenues to enhance current care and establish new therapies. Following this pilot study, the participant selection criteria will be refined and datasets will be expanded to include rehabilitation and surgical interventions, and genetic sequencing. The best timing for the questionnaire administration and frequency of follow-up prior to the implementation of a multisite AMC registry will be determined.
