Title : Atypical manifestation of late onset limb girdle muscular dystrophy presenting with recurrent falling and shoulder dysfunction: a case report.
Date : 2008
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Myopathies can be sub-classified into congenital, hereditary, mitochondrial, and secondary myopathies.Congenital myopathies are usually diagnosed post partal or in early childhood. Manifestation in adolescence is uncommon and most cases occur as sporadic mutations. Therefore, there is a risk of under diagnosing this disease in middle-aged patients showing pain, dysfunction, recurrent trauma or falls, where muscle atrophy is seen as a secondary injury.Our report is about a 54 year old Caucasian woman with an extended history of pain, loss of function and weakness in her right shoulder. The clinical picture showed a frozen right shoulder. The main finding was a marked limb-muscle atrophy of both delta- und biceps-muscles and a rotator cuff tear that had developed over years. Previous medical consultations attributed the atrophy to recurrent falls, shoulder dysfunction and pain. Conservative treatment (analgesics, physiotherapy, training) had failed.The familiar anamnesis was free of any neurological diseases or other genetic diseases.MRI showed a sub-total proximal muscular limb atrophy and a rotator cuff tear in both shoulders. An incision-biopsy of the right delta- and biceps-muscle revealed a chronical myopathy. The level of creatinkinasis was expected to be high but measurements showed values only slightly above normal. Immunohistochemistry, eventually revealed a mild form of LGMD (type 2I). Due to the pattern of symptoms and diagnostic results we described the case as atypical LGMD.Our case presents a phenotype of a late onset of limb girdle muscular dystrophy syndrome associated with shoulder pain and dysfunction and recurrent falls. This kind of disease is not very common. In particular, muscle atrophy in the elderly is generally seen as a secondary injury. This case should remind us of the importance of a differential diagnosis of a late onset of muscular dystrophy-syndrome in the elderly, since an early diagnosis offers more treatment options, therefore preventing a rapid progression.
