Title : Laminin α2 Deficiency-Related Muscular Dystrophy Mimicking Emery-Dreifuss and Collagen VI related Diseases.
Date : 2015
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Laminin α2 deficient congenital muscular dystrophy, caused by mutations in the LAMA2 gene, is characterized by early muscle weakness associated with abnormal white matter signal on cerebral MRI.To report on 4 patients with LAMA2 gene mutations whose original clinical features complicated the diagnosis strategy.Clinical, electrophysiological, muscle imaging and histopathological data were retrospectively collected from all patients. DNA samples were analysed by next-generation sequencing or direct gene sequencing. Laminin α2 was analysed by western-blot and immunohistochemistry.The four patients achieved independent walking. All had proximal muscle weakness with scapular winging and prominent joint contractures without peripheral neuropathy. During follow-up, two patients suffered from refractory epilepsy associated with brain leukoencephalopathy in one, polymicrogyria and lissencephaly without white matter changes in the other. In two patients, the distribution of fatty infiltration resembles that of collagen-VI related myopathies. Dilated cardiomyopathy contstartabstractwith conduction defects, suggestive of Emery-Dreifuss myopathy, emerged in two of them within the 4th decade. Molecular diagnosis remained elusive for many years. Finally, targeted capture-DNA sequencing unveiled the involvement of the LAMA2 gene in two families, and led us to further identify LAMA2 mutations in the remaining family using Sanger sequencing.This report extends the clinical and radiological features of partial Laminin α2 deficiency since patients showed atypical manifestations including dilated cardiomyopathy with conduction defects in 2, epilepsy in 2, one of whom also had sole cortical brain abnormalities. Importantly, clinical findings and muscle imaging initially pointed to collagen-VI related disorders and Emery-Dreifuss muscular dystrophy.
