Title : Fibrodysplasia ossificans progressiva: a clue from the fly?
Date : 1990
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Fibrodysplasia (myositis) ossificans progressiva (FOP) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by symmetrical congenital malformations of the blastemal anlage of the hands and feet and by progressive heterotopic chondrogenesis and ossification of the soft connective tissues. There is neither an established pathogenesis nor an effective treatment for this disabling disorder. We reevaluated the published data on the natural history of FOP and discovered an array of developmental gradients (characteristic patterns of disease expression) similar to developmental anomalies induced by pleiotropic mutations of the decapentaplegic (dpp) locus in Drosophila melanogaster. The protein encoded by the dpp locus is a member of the transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) family of molecules. It shares 75% sequence homology with the c-terminal region of two recently cloned human bone morphogenetic proteins (BMP-2A, BMP-2B), also members of the TGF-beta family. The striking sequence identity across so large an evolutionary distance suggests that the BMP-2 genes in man and the dpp gene in the fly may be derived from a common ancestral gene. BMP is the only molecule discovered thus far that is capable of inducing endochondral ossification in vivo. Expression of endochondral bone formation is the basis for limb formation in embryogenesis, longitudinal bone growth in postnatal life, and local bone regeneration (fracture healing) following injury. We believe that FOP is a genetic disorder characterized by a disturbed developmental expression of this endochondral program and may represent a mutation resulting in a dominant gain of function. The developmental similarities between decapentaplegic in the fly and FOP in man suggest a useful model for the study of FOP. The use of such a model might be especially fruitful in suggesting a molecular basis for FOP.
