Title : Temporomandibular Joint Ankylosis in Pediatric Patients With Craniofacial Differences: Causes, Recurrence and Clinical Outcomes.
Date : 2020 Jul-Aug
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : The authors present an institutional experience treating congenital and acquired temporomandibular joint (TMJ) ankylosis, detailing outcomes and potential risk factors of recurrence.Retrospective chart review identified patients with TMJ ankylosis (1976-2019). Clinical records, operative reports, and imaging studies were reviewed for demographics, surgical operations, and ankylosis including maximal interincisal opening (MIO) and re-ankylosis.Forty-four TMJs with bony ankylosis were identified in 28 patients (mean age at any initial mandibular surgery: 3.7; range:0-14 years). Follow-up was 13.7 ± 5.9 years. Sixteen (57.1%) patients had bilateral ankylosis; 27(96.4%) had syndromes. Nine patients had congenital ankylosis, 16 had iatrogenic ankylosis (4.5 ± 3.7 years from initial distraction osteogenesis or autologous mandibular reconstruction) referred from outside institutions in 6 instances, and 3 had post-infectious ankylosis. Patients having their first mandibular operation at a younger age had more frequent reoperations for recurrent TMJ ankylosis, although this did not reach statistical significance. Mean improvement in MIO was 21.4 ± 7.3 mm. Ankylosis recurred in 21 (75%) patients. Five patients with congenital TMJ ankylosis required gastrostomy and remained at least partially dependent. Five patients had tracheostomy at the time of TMJ ankylosis surgery: 2 were eventually decannulated and 3 required repeat tracheostomy after ankylosis recurrence and remained tracheostomy-dependent.The clinical course of TMJ ankylosis in children affected by craniofacial differences is complex and typically involves a high rate of recurrence and multiple reoperations despite initial improvement in postoperative MIO. Younger age at initial mandibular surgery and number of operations require further investigation as potential predictors of recurrent TMJ ankylosis as well as tracheostomy and gastrostomy dependence.
