Title : Complex primary total hip arthroplasty.
Date : 2013
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Although total hip arthroplasty is now a classic procedure that is well controlled by orthopedic surgeons, some cases remain complex. Difficulties may be due to co-morbidities: obesity, skin problems, muscular problems, a history of neurological disease or associated morphological bone deformities. Obese patients must be informed of their specific risks and a surgical approach must be used that obtains maximum exposure. Healing of incisions is not a particular problem, but adhesions must be assessed. Neurological diseases may require tenotomy and the use of implants that limit instability. Specific techniques or implants are necessary to respect hip biomechanics (offset, neck-shaft angle) in case of a large lever arm or coxa vara. In case of arthrodesis, before THA can be performed, the risk of infection must be specifically evaluated if the etiology is infection, and the strength of the gluteal muscles must be determined. Congenital hip dysplasia presents three problems: the position and coverage of the cup, placement of a specific or custom made femoral stem, with an osteotomy if necessary, and finally lowering the femoral head into the cup by freeing the soft tissues or a shortening osteotomy. Acetabular dysplasia should not be underestimated in the presence of significant bone defect (BD), and reconstruction with a bone graft can be proposed. Sequelae from acetabular fractures presents a problem of associated BD. Internal fixation hardware is rarely an obstacle but the surgical approach should take this into account. Treatment of acetabular protrusio should restore a normal center of rotation, and prevent recurrent progressive protrusion. The use of bone grafts and reinforcement rings are indispensible. Femoral deformities may be congenital or secondary to trauma or osteotomy. They must be evaluated to restore hip biomechanics that are as close to normal as possible. Fixation of implants should restore anteversion, length and the lever arm. Most problems that can make THA a difficult procedure may be anticipated with proper understanding of the case and thorough preoperative planning.
