Title : [Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita--a rare congenital stiff joints syndrome].
Date : 2006 Jul-Aug
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita is not a disease but a term describing multiple congenital contractures. Etiological factors include neurological and primary myogenic diseases. This rare syndrome is present at birth and is characterized by reduced mobility of many joints. The contractures involve two or more joints with ankylosis. The accompanying musculature is hypoplastic, but multiple pterygia are also present. Arthrogryposis multiplex congenita is a heterogeneous group of disorders with the incidence rate of 6.2/100000 liveborn infants. The true incidence cannot be established, because many cases result in spontaneous miscarriages or stillbirth. More than 90% of cases are associated with birth defects. The cause of this syndrome is unknown. Many forms are not hereditary, though there are hereditary forms as well.This paper presents a case with arthrogryposis multiplex congenita. The pregnancy was not controlled regularly. During the pregnancy, oligohydramnion was detected. Due to contractures, labor ended is cesarean section. The child was born in the 34th week of gestation. Flexion and extension joint contractures were observed. Active and passive mobility of the afflicted joints was reduced. There was a limited motor function in the shoulder, elbow and wrist joints with a slight internal rotation of the shoulder joint and lower arm joints during pronation. The hips were subluxated; the feet were in equinovarus position and the fingers in ulnar deviation with partial syndactyly of the 4th and 5th fingers on the left hand. The infant had abnormal dermatoglyphics. The neck was short, and the 2nd and 3rd cervical vertebrae were fused. There was also a slight left-sided thoracic scoliosis. Trismus was present due to the existing ankylosis of the temporomandibular joint. The karyotype was normal. The serum creatinine phosphokinase was slightly elevated The electromyographic picture indicate non-specific signs of myopathy.This is a case report of a "stiff joint syndrome". Due to the fact that data from the family history were unavailable, we could not establish the type of syndrome. However, heredity, growth and development at later age, as well as IQ, might significantly help in definite differentiation of this syndrome. In pregnancy, oligohydramnion should indicate more detailed ultrasonographic examination, as ankylosed joints can be detected in utero.
