Title : [Treatment of contracture of achilles tendon with minimally invasive achilles tendon lengthening and system rehabilitation].
Date : 2012
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : To investigate the safety and efficacy of minimally invasive achilles tendon lengthening and system rehabilitation for the treatment of contracture of achilles tendon.From January 2002 to December 2010, 27 patients (31 feet) with contracture of achilles tendon were treated with minimally invasive achilles tendon lengthening and system rehabilitation. There were 11 males and 16 females with an average age of 35.5 years (ranged 3 to 65 years). Right foot was in 13 cases, left foot was in 10 cases, both feet were in 4 cases. Course of disease was from 1 to 5 years with an average of 2.3 years. The cause of contracture included postoperative complication of tibia fractures treated with intramedullary nailing in 7 feet, sequelae of lower leg compartment syndrome in 11 feet, congenital talipes equinovarus in 13 feet (both feet in 4). Before operation, all the patients walked with limping, plantar flexion anomaly was from 15 degrees to 50 degrees with an average of 35.5 degrees. The strength of quadriceps muscle of thigh was grade V in 27 feet, grade IV in 4 feet, the strength of musculus triceps surae was grade V in 24 feet, grade IV in 7 feet.All the patients were followed-up for 6-24 months with an average of 11.3 months. According to standard of Arner-Lindholm to evaluate function of ankle joint, 29 feet obtained excellent results and 2 feet good. No infection, re-rupture or re-contracture was found.Minimally invasive achilles tendon lengthening and system rehabilitation in treating contracture of achilles tendon has advantage such as simple operation, less complication, lower recurrence rate, which is favourable for thoroughly rehabilitation of patients. But, the case in which the strength of quadriceps muscle of thigh or musculus triceps surae still less than grade III after preoperative rehabilitation care should not choose the method.
