Title : [Clinical and biopsy-based myopathological features of 5 cases with centronuclear myopathy].
Date : 2008
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : To analyze the clinical and pathological features of the centronuclear myopathy (CNM) in 5 Chinese patients and evaluate their diagnostic and differential diagnostic value.A standard series of histochemical and enzymohistochemical investigations were performed on all muscle specimens of CNM cases obtained via biopsy. The clinical manifestations and myopathological features of 5 CNM patients were retrospectively analyzed.The age of onset ranged from 3 to 12 years. All patients primarily presented with limb girdle muscle weakness. In 3 patients extraocular muscles, facial muscles and cervical muscles were affected, respectively. The proximal muscles were affected more seriously than the distal and the lower limbs more seriously than the upper. Tendon reflex was reduced and no evident muscular atrophy was seen. The course of the disease ranged from 4 to 46 years and progressed slowly. The ability of walking could be maintained for many years and the fast movements such as running and jumping were impaired early. The serum creatine kinase (CK) level was normal or elevated slightly. Electromyography showed myopathic pattern in all cases. Two patients (mother and son) were from the same family and the son's two siblings had similar symptoms indicating autosomal dominant inherited pattern. There was mild variation in fiber size and most small fibers were round. Interstitial tissue increase slightly. Fibers with centrally placed nuclei accounted for 23% - 93%. Neither necrotic and regenerated fibers nor infiltration of inflammatory cells were seen. Type I fiber predominance and hypotrophy were present in all patients. Abnormal arrangement of the sarcoplasmic strands in appearance of "spokes of a wheel", increased oxidative enzyme activity around centronuclear and perinuclear halo were observed in 2 patients by NADH-TR staining.For the patients who had the onset during the childhood and presented with slow progressive limb girdle muscle weakness, disability of fast movements and normal serum CK level, the possibility of benign congenital myopathy should be considered. High percentage of centronuclear fibers as well as type I fiber predominance and hypotrophy in muscle biopsy pathology may provide a morphological evidence for the definite diagnosis of CNM.
