Title : Management and diagnosis of mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation disorders: focus on very-long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency.
Date : 2019
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation disorders (FAODs) are caused by defects in β-oxidation enzymes, including very long-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase (VLCAD), trifunctional protein (TFP), carnitine palmitoyltransferase-2 (CPT2), carnitine-acylcarnitine translocase (CACT) and others. During prolonged fasting, infection, or exercise, patients with FAODs present with hypoglycemia, rhabdomyolysis, cardiomyopathy, liver dysfunction, and occasionally sudden death. This article describes the diagnosis, newborn screening, and treatment of long-chain FAODs with a focus on VLCAD deficiency. VLCAD deficiency is generally classified into three phenotypes based on onset time, but the classification should be comprehensively determined based on genotype, residual enzyme activity, and clinical course, due to a lack of apparent genotype-phenotype correlation. With the expansion of newborn screening for FAODs, several issues have arisen, such as missed detection, overdiagnosis (including detection of benign/asymptomatic type), and poor prognosis of the neonatal-onset form. Meanwhile, dietary management and restriction of exercise have been unnecessary for patients with the benign/asymptomatic type of VLCAD deficiency with a high fatty acid oxidation flux score. Although L-carnitine therapy for VLCAD/TFP deficiency has been controversial, supplementation with L-carnitine may be accepted for CPT2/CACT and multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiencies. Recently, a double-blind, randomized controlled trial of triheptanoin (seven-carbon fatty acid triglyceride) versus trioctanoin (regular medium-chain triglyceride) was conducted and demonstrated improvement of cardiac functions on triheptanoin. Additionally, although the clinical efficacy of bezafibrate remains controversial, a recent open-label clinical trial showed efficacy of this drug in improving quality of life. These drugs may be promising for the treatment of FAODs, though further studies are required.
