Title : Postinfarction ventricular septal defect closure with Amplatzer occluders.
Date : 2003
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Postinfarction ventricular septal defect (PIVSD) is a rare and life-threatening complication with high risk of both surgical and medical treatment. Another option available now is transcatheter closure. The purpose of this paper is to report the results of such treatment with Amplatzer occluders.Seven patients aged from 51 to 71 years were included. The procedure was performed between 2 and 10 weeks after myocardial infarction. One patient had double residual VSD (2 months after previous surgery) and another, coexisting critical stenosis of right coronary artery (RCA). All patients were in III/IV NYHA class, on intropes, one patient on aortic balloon counterpulsation. Venous jugular approach was used to close the VSD in six patients, venous transfemoral in one patient. Implantation of six Ampaltzer atrial septal occluders (ASO) and one muscular Amplatzer VSD occluder (VSO) were performed.All procedures but two were finished successfully. In one patient, the defect could not be entered neither from the venous nor the arterial side due to unusual oblique course (which was confirmed during subsequent operation). In the second patient (2 weeks after MI), the reason was unstable position of 24 mm ASO (probably due to necrotic borders of VSD). Immediate significant clinical improvement was achieved in all patients, in whom PIVSD was closed with Amplatzer occluders. In one postsurgical patient, two ASO were used; in another patient, prior to VSD closure, PTCA and stent implantation to RCA was performed. The stretched diameter of PIVSD ranged from 8 to 22 mm, the size of implanted Amplatzer occluders from 12 to 24 mm. Fluoroscopy time was 60 min (18-120). During the procedure, ventricular fibrillation requiring defibrillation was observed in three patients. One patient died 1 week after the procedure because of multiorgan failure and increasing mitral incompetence (MI).Despite some technical problems, implantation of Amplatzer occluders, is an attractive option of treatment of patients with subacute PIVSD.
