Title : Potential patient screening for late-onset Pompe disease in suspected sleep apnea: a rationale and study design for a Prospective Multicenter Observational Cohort Study in Japan (PSSAP-J Study).
Date : 2021
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Pompe disease is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by deficiency of the acid α-glucosidase (GAA) enzyme. GAA deficiency induces progressive glycogen accumulation which leads to weakness of the respiratory muscle including the diaphragm. Pompe disease is one of the few myopathies, for which an established therapy is available. Thus, earlier detection of potential late-onset Pompe disease (LOPD) and earlier intervention would have a significant clinical impact.Our hypothesis is that sleep problems including sleep disordered breathing (SDB) and clinical symptoms may indicate an early stage of LOPD since decreased respiratory muscle activity generally first presents during sleep. Thus, the aims of this prospective, multicenter observational cohort study in Japan (PSSAP-J) are to demonstrate a higher prevalence of LOPD in a sleep lab-based population (primary outcome), and to identify predictive factors for LOPD from findings in diagnostic polysomnography (PSG) and clinical symptoms (secondary outcomes).The study design is a prospective multicenter observational cohort study. Consecutive patients who present to sleep labs due to suspected SDB for an overnight PSG will be enrolled. All patients will be measured for creatine kinase, GAA activity, and if necessary, genetic analysis of GAA. Furthermore, chest X-ray, pulmonary function test, and arterial blood gas analysis will be collected. Then, prevalence and specific findings of LOPD will be assessed.Congenital myopathy shows a shift from slow-deep to rapid-shallow breathing during transition from wakefulness to sleep accompanying a symptom of waking with gasping (actual further results are pending).The distribution in respiratory physiology between during wakefulness and sleep specific to LOPD may provide insights into early-stage detection.UMIN000039191, UMIN Clinical Trials Registry ( http://www.umin.ac.jp/ctr ).
