Title : Musculoskeletal disorders in neonatal foals.
Date : 1985
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Angular limb deformities are not uncommon in foals. Mild angular deviation due to laxity of supporting soft tissues often resolves spontaneously. However, external splinting or casting may be needed in severe cases or in those that do not resolve. When incomplete ossification of carpal or tarsal bones is the cause of the limb deformity, external support is mandatory to prevent further deformation and abnormal development of the bones. When epiphyseal and metaphyseal abnormalities cause axial deviation, surgical intervention is usually necessary. Circumferential periosteal transection and/or transphyseal bridging are methods used. The choice is dictated by the type and severity of the deformity. Flexor contractures of the forelimb vary greatly in degree and joints affected. Physical therapy combined with intermittent splint application is often successful, but surgical intervention may be necessary in unresponsive cases. Flexor tendon laxity is usually self-correcting but physical therapy, restricted exercise, and splinting may be needed. Rotational abnormalities are easier to correct in the forelimbs than in the hind limbs. Correction is usually accomplished by frequent corrective hoof trimming. Miscellaneous anomalies of the musculoskeletal system may sometimes be amenable to surgical correction, although the potential disadvantages must be carefully considered. Septic arthritis is a frequent sequela to neonatal septicemia and must be treated aggressively and early in its development. Appropriate systemic antibiotics, joint lavage, and rest are indicated. Neonatal osteomyelitis has a poor prognosis and requires prompt, vigorous therapy; even then, growth anomalies of the limb or contiguous septic arthritis may develop and further worsen the prognosis. Early accurate diagnosis and prompt appropriate therapy are vital in treating musculoskeletal disorders in foals, especially when a successful outcome is judged by the animal becoming a functional athlete.
