Title : [Congenital equinovarus clubfoot].
Date : 1999
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : A congenital clubfoot is often associated with a neuromuscular disease, a chromosomal anomaly, or a syndrome. The present review will only study the idiopathic clubfoot seen in an otherwise normal child. It is considered nowadays that a clubfoot is secondary to a defect in the spontaneous "rotation-elevation" mechanism which should occur between the 9th and 10th week of fetal development. Several possible factors influence the embryonic development: genetic, neurologic, muscular, environmental, and toxic factors. Modern notions of anatomy and physiology of the foot allow a better understanding of the deformations seen in a clubfoot: calcaneo-forefoot block, talonavicular joint double "belonging", notion of "relative" hindfoot supination. The osteo-articular deformations involve mainly the talus, the calcaneus, the navicular. They are associated to articular stiffness secondary to soft tissue retractions like the posterolateral, anteromedial, and the anterolateral fibrous knots. Prenatal diagnosis can be made using the ultrasound which is usually performed at 20 weeks of gestation. Nevertheless, only the clinical exam at birth will evaluate the degree of severity of the clubfoot based upon its reducibility, the presence of skin creases, and the importance of muscular atrophy. Imaging techniques (especially standard x-ray) are useless diagnostic tools. They will be necessary for the follow-up, the evaluation of residual defects, and for the possible surgical indications. Conservative treatment is used first, and in the hands of experienced teams will give a sufficient correction in 70 to 80% of the patients. The surgical treatment is used to complete the correction obtained by conservative means. Surgical treatment will free the retracted soft tissues. Postoperatively the foot will be immobilized in the appropriate position for 2 to 3 months. Clubfoot treatments are associated with complications which have to be known to avoid them if possible and/or to be able to take the appropriate therapeutic actions when necessary. The results of clubfoot treatment are satisfactory in the majority of patients despite the treatment difficulties and the possible relapses during growth. Follow-up is mandatory until the end of growth.
