Title : Combined double chambered right ventricle, tricuspid valve dysplasia, ventricular septal defect, and subaortic stenosis in a dog.
Date : 2017
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Double chambered right ventricle (DCRV) is a congenital heart anomaly where the right ventricle is divided into two chambers. We describe, for the first time, an unusual combination of DCRV combined with some other congenital heart defects.A 1.2-year-old Golden Retriever was presented with lethargy, exercise intolerance and ascites. Physical examination revealed an irregularly irregular pulse and a grade V/VI, systolic, right cranial murmur. Electrocardiography revealed widened and splintered QRS complexes with a right bundle-branch block pattern. Radiography demonstrated right-sided cardiomegaly. Two-dimensional echocardiography identified a DCRV with tricuspid valve dysplasia. The patient died despite abdominocentesis and 4 days of oral pharmacotherapy, and necropsy revealed an anomalous fibromuscular structure that divided the right ventricle into two compartments. Another finding was tricuspid valve dysplasia with hypoplasia of the posterior and septal leaflets. The anterior leaflet was prominent, being part of the anomalous structure that divided the right ventricle. Necropsy also identified a perimembranous ventricular septal defect and mild subaortic stenosis. Histopathological examination of the fibromuscular band that separated the right ventricle identified longitudinally oriented layers of dense fibrous connective tissue and myocardial cells arranged in a plexiform pattern. The muscular component was well represented at the ventral area of the fibromuscular band, and was absent in the central zone. Superficially, the endocardium presented areas of nodular hyperplasia covering mainly the fibrous part of the abnormal structure. The nodules were sharply demarcated and were composed by loosely arranged connective tissue with myxoid appearance, covered by discrete hyperplastic endocardium.Concomitant cardiac malformations involving DCRV, tricuspid valve dysplasia, perimembranous ventricular septal defect and mild subaortic stenosis have not been previously described in veterinary medicine, and are reported here for the first time. Moreover, this is the first report of a canine patient with tricuspid valve dysplasia (TVD) and DCRV where the anterior leaflet is part of an anomalous structure dividing the right ventricle (RV) into two separate compartments.
