Title : Effects of a combination of ketanserin and propranolol on inflammatory hyperalgesia in rats.
Date : 2013
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Pain management is still challenging in clinic as current analgesics either are not very effective or produce serious adverse effects. This study aimed to examine if old drugs could display the new use and to develop a novel therapy for inflammatory pain. Injection of carrageenan in hindpaw evoked hyperalgesia detected by noxious heat stimulation. Intraplantar (i.pl.) injection of the 5-HT1A receptor antagonist WAY-100635 increased paw withdrawal latency (PWL) above normal level (hypoalgesia) during the late phase of carrageenan-evoked inflammation. The hypoalgesia was completely abolished by systemic injection of naloxone chloride and naloxone methiodide. Moreover, i.pl. injection of a combination of WAY-100635 and ketanserin, a 5-HT2A receptor antagonist, at their minimal doses attenuated hyperalgesia in the late phase of carrageenan-evoked inflammation. Subcutaneous (s.c.) injection of both ketanserin and propranolol dose-dependently inhibited carrageenan-evoked hyperalgesia. The treatment with a combination of ketanserin and propranolol by s.c. injection abolished carrageenan-evoked hyperalgesia at the doses, at which the drugs failed to alter the hypersensitivity when they were given alone. Furthermore, the combination of ketanserin and propranolol was also effective in relieving arthritic hyperalgesia and muscle pain at a minimal dose. The present study suggests that the activation of 5-HT1A receptors suppressed naloxone-reversible antinociception contributing to the maintenance of inflammatory pain, and that the concomitant blockade of 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptors in the periphery produced synergistic effects on inflammatory hyperalgesia. It is proposed that the combination of ketanserin and propranolol injected s.c. could be a promising therapy for relieving inflammatory pain with minimal side effects. 
