Title : Pax7, Pax3 and Mamstr genes are involved in skeletal muscle impaired regeneration of dy2J/dy2J mouse model of Lama2-CMD.
Date : 2019
Publication_type : Journal Article
Abstract : Congenital muscular dystrophy type-1A (Lama2-CMD) and Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) result from deficiencies of laminin-α2 and dystrophin proteins, respectively. Although both proteins strengthen the sarcolemma, they are implicated in clinically distinct phenotypes. We used RNA-deep sequencing (RNA-Seq) of dy2J/dy2J, Lama2-CMD mouse model, skeletal muscle at 8 weeks of age to elucidate disease pathophysiology. This study is the first report of dy2J/dy2J model whole transcriptome profile. RNA-Seq of the mdx mouse model of DMD and wild-type (WT) mouse was carried as well in order to enable a novel comparison of dy2J/dy2J to mdx. A large group of shared differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was found in dy2J/dy2J and mdx models (1834 common DEGs, false discovery rate [FDR] < 0.05). Enrichment pathway analysis using ingenuity pathway analysis showed enrichment of inflammation, fibrosis, cellular movement, migration and proliferation of cells, apoptosis and necrosis in both mouse models (P-values 3E-10-9E-37). Via canonical pathway analysis, actin cytoskeleton, integrin, integrin-linked kinase, NF-kB, renin-angiotensin, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, and calcium signaling were also enriched and upregulated in both models (FDR < 0.05). Interestingly, significant downregulation of Pax7 was detected in dy2J/dy2J compared to upregulation of this key regeneration gene in mdx mice. Pax3 and Mamstr genes were also downregulated in dy2J/dy2J compared to WT mice. These results may explain the distinct disease course and severity in these models. While the mdx model at that stage shows massive regeneration, the dy2J/dy2J shows progressive dystrophic process. Our data deepen our understanding of the molecular pathophysiology and suggest new targets for additional therapies to upregulate regeneration in Lama2-CMD.
